# Non-dominated Sorting Genetic Algorithm II (NSGA-II)

The Non-dominated sorting genetic algorithm (NSGA) [1] is a multi-objective genetic algorithm that utilizes a~sorting according to ranks for emphasizing good points and niche method for maintaining stable sub-populations of good points. The second generation of this algorithm, the Non-dominated sorting genetic algorithm II (NSGA-II), was firstly published in [2]. It is an improved approach of NSGA where the main disadvantages were a high computational complexity of non-dominated sorting, lack of elitism, and need for specifying a sharing parameter for obtaining a wide variety of solutions. This newer version of the algorithm deals with all of these disadvantages to obtain a better solution much faster [3].

NSGA-II creates a random parental population at the beginning with _N_ members. The original paper [2] does not define exactly any closer specification about this random population. The prescribed objective functions subsequently evaluate each member of the parental population; the objective functions transform a quasi-uniform distributed members in the design space into a non-uniform one in the objective space [4]. NSGA-II minimizes the fitness; therefore, if any of the objectives are maximized, it is necessary to transform it to minimization by multiplying its objective function values by minus one. The next offspring population with _N_ members is created by using classical operators as a selection, a crossover and a mutation (see, e.g. [5] for more details). To select two parental members for two offspring individuals creation, NSGA-II uses a binary tournament selection with two criteria -- a non-dominated sorting and a crowding distance. The tournament selection compares two members; if one member has a lower rank than the other, the member with lower rank is assigned into the mating pool. If two members have equal ranks and one has a higher crowding distance, the member in the lesser crowded region is placed into the mating pool. If two members have the same rank and the same crowding distance, one is chosen randomly to the mating pool. After the finished tournament selection, the mating pool contains _N_ members. Deb et al. recommend using a Simulated binary crossover (SBX) [6] as a crossover operator in [3]. As a mutation operator, we use a standard Gaussian mutation with zero mean and &sigma;<sub>M</sub> standard deviation; &sigma;<sub>M</sub> is equal to 20% of the total difference between the upper and lower bound of each design variable. Each offspring is transformed from the design space into the objective space by the objective functions. NSGA-II is an elitist evolutionary algorithm preserving the elite members of the parental population. All parents (&mu;) and offspring (&lambda;) individuals create a combined (&mu;+&lambda;) population. The best members from (&mu;+&lambda;) population are subsequently chosen to create the new parental population with _N_ members. A non-dominated sorting assigns ranks to all members in (&mu;+&lambda;) population, and all the slots for the next parental population are filled with the individuals sorted according to ranks from non-dominated sorting. The last included level is usually larger than the number of free slots and therefore can be accepted only partially. A crowding distance evaluates all potential candidates in this last but larger front. NSGA-II prefers diversity, and therefore the solutions that have larger crowding distance values are chosen to fill the free positions. An optimization run terminates after a predetermined number of generations.

Please, feel free to read about this algorithm in my PhD thesis, this text is taken from there. I have PDF copy in one of my repositories:
https://github.com/AdelaHlobilova/PhD-thesis 

### References:
[1] SRINIVAS, Nidamarthi; DEB, Kalyanmoy. Muiltiobjective optimization using nondominated sorting in genetic algorithms. Evolutionary computation, 1994, 2.3: 221-248. <br>
[2] DEB, Kalyanmoy, et al. A fast elitist non-dominated sorting genetic algorithm for multi-objective optimization: NSGA-II. In: International conference on parallel problem solving from nature. Springer, Berlin, Heidelberg, 2000. p. 849-858.<br>
[3] DEB, Kalyanmoy, et al. A fast and elitist multiobjective genetic algorithm: NSGA-II. IEEE transactions on evolutionary computation, 2002, 6.2: 182-197.<br>
[4] COELLO, Carlos A. Coello; LAMONT, Gary B. Applications of multi-objective evolutionary algorithms. World Scientific, 2004.<br>
[5] BURKE, Edmund K., et al. Search methodologies: introductory tutorials in optimization and decision support techniques. Springer, 2014.<br>
[6] DEB, Kalyanmoy, et al. Simulated binary crossover for continuous search space. Complex systems, 1995, 9.2: 115-148.<br>

